---
title: Design Ethics in Digital Psychiatry
layout: no-sidebar-page
---

As psychiatrists and other medical professionals begin to implement digital technologies in routine patient care, patients are exposed to novel privacy risks. Once, your interaction with a psychiatrist only had small traces which left the room in order to facilitate insurance payments or prescription. The anticipated changes in mental health care, however, will deploy massive information infrastructure in order to facilitate this care. Beyond the security risk of relying on digital infrastructure and cloud-based services for storing highly sensitive information about psychiatric symptoms and mental health, these new technologies also present new set of trust issues amongst patients, physicians and the technological systems which will mediate these future patient-physician relationships.

My ethnographic research in psychiatric technology development centered on the problem of how _perceived_ invasive information collection risks affecting patient trust, physician credibility and perhaps the viability of using future digital technologies for mental health care. As physicians well know, some kind of new orientation to clinical ethics frameworks that can successfully incorporate a notion of *design ethics* is essential for differentiating these patient-care platforms from other untrusted technology platforms and, ultimately, for promoting the success of patients' mental health and the success physician-led entrepreneurship. Indeed, mental health technology promises to reform technology development "ethics" (i.e., "Move fast and break things") because it proceeds from the idea that even if the system were perfect, it will always still be subject to and responsible for patient skepticism.

Guided by current critical discussions in social theory, I worked directly with psychiatrists and computer scientists to develop a patient-centered understanding of machine learning, monitoring algorithms and digital health platforms. I addressed these nuanced problems using a combination of ethnographic research methods including participant observation and semi-structured interviews with computer scientists, neuroscientists, physicians and venture capitalists. Over the course of several months of research, these conversations and observations narrowed-down to a set of important distinctions between how developers and physicians saw complex ethical-technical problems and solutions differently in their collaborations with each other. The topics of these discussions ranged from neuro-informatics, metadata systems and unsupervised machine learning algorithms, to clinical ethics frameworks, the nature of symptoms of mental illness, anxieties about digital surveillance, and emerging cultural models of public health entrepreneurship.

My interdisciplinary research ultimately aimed to uncover the aspirations and systemic setbacks in clinical and diagnostic technologies designed by physicians and developed in collaborations with computer programmers, engineers, research neuroscientists and venture capitalists, among others. I showed how psychiatrists and other professionals in this field are confronted with the strange banality that we currently have the information technologies that could prevent tragedy in patients' lives, but that the fear of liability and a general distrust of corporate-held technology often undermines the possibility of adapting them for care. My thesis brought these discussions into a broader narrative about the relationship between mental health, technology and society, as well as the various cultural and economic pressures for introducing automation technologies and technological "black boxes" into infrastructure oriented toward care. My research showed that implementing complex systems-level design solutions requires revisiting cultural representations of surveillance, data ecosystems, monetary relations to higher-profile technological projects, and other structural issues apart from but integral to the interface itself. Each of these issues strongly affects both patient and physician "experiences" with monitoring technology and digital interfaces.

My research culminated in a Master’s thesis in cultural anthropology which presented a novel argument about 1) situating design ethics in technology development and 2) effectively advocating for vulnerable populations as niche digital platforms evolve in the biomedical and healthcare sectors.

Read the introduction to my thesis [here](/assets/bailey_writing_sample_MA_3-11-18.pdf).

<br>

[Back to projects](../)
